 

 

 

 

 

Figure 6. Two equivalent representations in terms of a graph (left) and a
matrix (right).

of the equivalence of the graph and the matrix view of that
problem.

In addition, a score diagram keeps the information from
the previous rounds. This diagram provides the opportunity
to assess the improvement of the result over multiple rounds.
The score diagram visualizes the cardinality of the three
subgraphs generated from the nested dissection ordering.
The same colors for the vertex sets Vi, V2 and S' are
used in the graph view, the matrix view, and also for the
corresponding curves in the score diagram, see Fig. 10.

In each step of a round, the student clicks on a vertex
in the graph view. By that, the selected vertex is assigned
to the vertex separator. As a result, the selected vertex and
the corresponding column will be colored orange and the
column will be moved to the right of the matrix. Also, this
vertex number is added to the vertex separator list, which
saves the history of the selections as well as the possibility
to return to that step. We remove all edges incident to the
vertices in the vertex separator to show the effect of forming
the three components. However, the nonzeros corresponding
to these edges removed in the graph view are still depicted
in the matrix view. The two components V; and V2, together
with their corresponding matrix blocks A; and Ag, are
colored only if a vertex separator is determined.

As an example, consider a scenario where one is interested
in finding a small vertex separator for the matrix shown in
Fig. 6. Suppose that the student first selects the vertex 10.
As a result the row and column number 10 is brought to the
right of the matrix and they will be colored as orange; see
Fig. 7. Notice that, now, all edges incident to the vertex 10
are eliminated in the graph view, while the corresponding
nonzeros are still shown in the matrix view. Then, the student
needs to click on vertices repeatedly, until a vertex separator
is found. The size of the vertex separator depends on the
student’s choice of the vertices. It is not always possible to
find a separator with minimal size in the first try. Fig. 8
represents the result in which the student has clicked first
on vertex 10 and then on 4. This result is bad since the
number of vertices in V; and V2, corresponding to the sizes

213658 94nN27 10

 

Figure 7. Graph and matrix view after selecting the vertex number 10.
The decomposition into two blocks is still not shown as the graph is not
yet decomposed into two disconnected components.

 

 

Figure 8.

Graph and matrix view after selecting the vertices number 10
and then 4. The selection is not adequate as the sizes of blocks are not
balanced.

of the blocks, is not balanced. A better result for this problem
instance could be achieved with more effort by clicking on
vertices 8 and 10. As shown in Fig. 9, the size of the vertex
separator is given by 2 and the sizes of the diagonal blocks
are balanced.

A resulting score diagram from different rounds looks
like Fig. 10. Here, the blue and red curves should have
values close to each other since this indicates the balancing

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 9. Graph and matrix view after selecting the vertices number 10 and
then 8. The block sizes are balanced and the separator size is minimized.

1126

